---
layout: post
title: "Patterns and causes of species richness: a general simulation model for macroecology"
date: 2010-04-08
comments: false
---

<div class='post'>
<a href="http://docs.google.com/fileview?id=0B_M0mgmVJAKUMTE3MDA1NTktNDcyZS00OGI0LWFkY2MtOWFhYWZmMDQzMjM2&hl=en">Ecology Letters, (2009) 12: 873–886</a><br /><br />So its been a bit since I've written anything, I was in Florida last week and I haven't found much recently thats caught my attention since I've returned, so I've decided to go a bit deeper beyond literature from 2010.  As I begin to seriously apply myself to my post-doc search, I am beginning to try and read literature by potential post-doc advisors.  In this case it's Carsten Rahbek from the<a href="http://macroecology.ku.dk/">Center for Macroecology, Evolution and Climate</a> at the University of Copenhagen. He collaborates pretty heavily with Nick, so I hope that will at least lend me a bit of credence.  This is a good paper to start with because it gives a perspective on new directions for the field of macroecology.<br /><br />It begins by addressing what constitutes macroecological data and some of the short comings of current macroecological curve fitting methods.  This just seems like a fancy word for regression.  Essentially the data is a set of grid cells with species richness counts and another set of grid cells with environmental data, log transformed and then *presto*, regression!  Now some of the serious short comings of this approach is that there are all sorts of autocorrelation problems with environmental data and other geometric quantities such as latitude.  So what's a macorecologist to do?  The approach outlined by the NCEAS group, led by Nick, is to develop a general simulation model (GSM).  This is essentially an agent-based or cellular automata model with a variety of "knobs".  The authors outline 3 potential knobs: dispersal kernel, speciation model, and environmental gradient.  They posit at its simplest state you can have simple off-on switches for null / mechanistic models for each of these processes.  They then outline how each of the unique 8 states of each model correspond (or don't) to a model in the literature.  They finally outline a criteria for how to assess model fit using a modified mean square error and a minimization of Kluback-Leibler distance.  <br /><br />I love this sort of proposal because I'm a big fan of agent based model in ecology and certainly want to move in that direction for my post-doc.  I believe that these sorts of models built from the ground up are easy to control, have transparent assumptions and allow for "experiments" where empirical work cannot logistically be conducted (like in macroecology).  The problem is that with model such as the idea that you could toggle things such as environmental gradients, "Environmental gradients: 0 = colonization and ⁄ or range expansion into all grid cells equiprobable, 1 = probabilistic colonization and ⁄ or<br />range expansion into grid cells as a function of measured environmental variables", seems a bit simplistic.  While I understand the 0 state, the 1 state could take on a variety of forms, i.e. the kind of "function of measured environmental variables".  This remains one of the challenges of simulation modeling, that the possibilities are almost endless.  Other than that I enjoyed this paper, and papers like these are always good to read because they point out the various holes in a field that need work.</div>
