---
layout: post
title: "Neutrality and the Response of Rare Species to Environmental Variance"
date: 2010-03-16
comments: false
---

<div class='post'>
<a href="http://www.plosone.org/article/info:doi/10.1371/journal.pone.0002777#pone.0002777-Alonso1">Benedetti-Cecchi L, Bertocci I, Vaselli S, Maggi E, Bulleri F (2008) Neutrality and the Response of Rare Species to Environmental Variance. PLoS ONE 3(7)</a><br /><br />This is technically yesterday's article, but I didn't have a chance to finish the post on it.  I like Benedetti-Cecchi's work and I haven't seen much on neutral theory out there recently, so I decided to read this paper.  The premise is simple.  They use two different data sets, one an observational and one experimental to test the decay in similarity between rocking intertidal communities against simulated neutral communities.  The first observational part uses a 16 year time series to test if the observed decay in similarity is different than expected under ecological drift.  The second experimental part uses a classic Benedetti-Cecchi approach of crossing treatments in the timing and intensity of the variance of a disturbance. His supposition is that if neutrality holds, the temporal variance shouldn't matter, only the intensity of the disturbance since this only effects births/deaths and colonization, and not the timing.  I find this second supposition somewhat tenuous and the authors do as well, but try and support it by stating: " However, the extent to which neutrality can be tested by examining assemblage responses to environmental stochasticity is unclear [27]. We substantiate our conjecture by showing with simulations that temporal variance of disturbance has no effect on species rank-abundance curves under neutrality, either under constant or variable rates of immigration [28]. Furthermore, we consider that temporal variance of disturbance elicits non-neutral responses only if it modifies species abundance distributions by influencing the probability of occurrence of individual species or groups of species, consistently with the definition of neutrality."  This to me seems to be close to a tautology.<br /><br />The authors then find that their data isn't different from expectations of the neutral model.  They make this assessment based on mantel tests of different distance metrics at each time step.  They also do some simulations with their experimental data to create a null distribution based on the neutral model to test their experimental data against.  Finally they note that rare species are have a density dependent advantage in variable environments because of high growth at lower numbers.    <br /><br />I like much of what they have to say about neutrality, and I think neutrality is more common than many ecologists admit.  The part that I'm not such a fan of though is that they test only the neutral model.  Many of the early challenges to Neutral theory, such as the one made by Brian McGill in 2003 in Nature focus on comparing neutral with other models such as the Log-normal.  I think that the paper would have been stronger with a test of multiple models.  Multiple models can match data, so you need a stronger test of model fit than a simple null hypothesis test.</div>
