---
layout: post
title: "Temporal shift in density dependence among North American breeding duck populations"
date: 2010-03-10
comments: false
---

<div class='post'>
Temporal shift in density dependence among North American<br />breeding duck populations<br /><a href="http://docs.google.com/fileview?id=0B_M0mgmVJAKUZWQ2YWY0OTAtNjNkMS00ZGIxLThjZWItZDhmNTkyODI3ZDYz&hl=en">Ecology, 91(2), 2010, pp. 571–581</a><br /><br />Well, I'll begin my second post with an observation that will soon become obvious to anyone that reads this.  I'm interested in Bayesian methods, complex systems tools (specifically agent based models), population time series analysis and metacommunities.  But I have a real soft spot for time series papers, and hopefully (fingers crossed) I'll have a couple floating out there myself (currently 1 in review, 1 in prep).  I'll try to not skew too heavily to just reading papers about time series methods, but this is so close to my own current manuscript, I have to read it.<br /><br />This paper left me with mixed feelings.  On the one hand I read it very carefully (hence why this took me so long) and followed up with skimming some of the references. On the other, I felt like they had lots of time series smoke and mirrors to say not very much in the end.  I think if anything this has shown me the importance of clarity in writing and making your point, but I owe the paper a more thorough review than that. <br /><br />The authors fit three different time series models to time series data from 10 different duck species from a large scale breeding duck survey that took place from 1955 to 2005.  They assert that there has been a shift in density dependence that happened in 1980, with in increase in density independence after 1980.  They also show that population parameters are not related to "evolutionary strategy" as measured by a statistic called the LHI (life history index).  Furthermore they show that population's shifting parameters are unrelated to carrying capacity or mean abundance.  <br /><br />Using the 10 different duck species time series data they fit three different models, a density independent, density dependent and a theta-Ricker.  Curiously they also fit a Gompertz model and Gompertz state-space, but don't report the results from those models, except in an appendix, and go to great lengths to make the case that their data are robust to measurement error and that all the error they observe is process error.  They find that when they split the data they see the above mentioned shift from density dependent to density independent processes.  I think they have a good point, but I'm perplexed by their choice of figures and tables.  They leave the most informative table in the appendix, one that shows the shifting delta AIC's and AIC weights for each segment.  I think also some sort of figure showing mean abundance and the shift would have been good.  Instead I believe the focused too heavily on the diagnostics of the time series and not the data themselves.  I don't doubt the authors conclusions, but I'm surprised that the paper was as unclear as it was.</div>
