---
layout: post
title: "The implicit assumption of symmetry and the species abundance distribution"
date: 2010-03-25
comments: false
---

<div class='post'>
<a href="http://docs.google.com/fileview?id=0B_M0mgmVJAKUMDZlODdlZjAtYTAzYy00NTI4LWE0YzctZDIzYTM5NTU5MDM0&hl=en">Ecology Letters, (2008) 11: 93–105</a><br /><br />A consequence of trying to read everyday is that you will cover a wide variety of topics.  The upshot is unfortunately that you can get lost in many of the details in a topic outside of your area of expertise.  Since much of my recent work has been in population dynamics, reading a paper about that subject is pretty straight forward for me.  This paper by Alonso et al. is focused on the sampling theory and once he moved beyond a simple example with a multinomial likelihood, I began to get a bit lost.  The qualitative aspects of the paper made solid logical sense though.  First though, lets just take a step back and cover "What is a species abundance distribution (SAD)?"<br /><br />At its simplest, it is a way to quantify the biodiversity of a community.  Essentially you collect a vector of species, and create a histogram of it.  What this creates is a histogram with abundance categories on the x-axis and the number of species in each category on the y-axis.  Now usually you don't get exact numbers of the same species, so often times people will use "bins" on the x-axis of ranges of abundance.  A good introduction to all of this is McGill et al (Ecology Letters, (2007) 10: 995–1015).  The problem has typically been that we can statistically describe these broad community level patterns of abundance, but rarely do we understand the mechanism that creates them.  Regardless of this problem (which the authors mention on the outset) another problem is that the sampling theory that underlies these SAD patterns makes two very strong assumptions that are highly unlikely to be true.  1).  The abundance distribution for every species within the sampled community is the same, i.e. same birthrates, deathrates, life history, etc... They term these assumptions "observer independent".  2).  All the species within the sampled community are equally easy to sight/capture/etc...  These are termed "observer dependent" assumptions.  Together these assumptions make up what is known as species symmetry.  The authors then go on to develop a mechanistic "asymmetric" sampling theory.  Here's the part where I get lost, and if you've got more of a background in this sort of thing than I do, I'm sure it will make sense.  <br /><br />What was most interesting about the paper is that much of the conclusion seems to be aimed at rebutting attacks on Neutral theory based of SAD's.  They reject some of the criticisms of McGill and say: "Evidently, it is a trivial<br />truism that the consistency of a single empirical pattern with<br />a quantitative prediction from a single model is insufficient<br />to accept that the basic processes generating this pattern in<br />nature are precisely those assumed by the model (McGill<br />2006)."<br /><br />They then go on a long discourse about scientific theory and weights of evidence from multiple studies.  While I think its all fine what they write about testing model predictions etc etc in a general framework, I think in the end the almost "political" nature of the paper detracts from it.  It would have been great if the discussion focused more on their theory in the paper, and less on the politics of the Niche-Neutrality debate.</div>
