---
layout: post
title: "Phylogenetic diversity metrics for ecological communities: integrating species richness, abundance and evolutionary history"
date: 2010-04-19
comments: false
---

<div class='post'>
<a href="https://docs.google.com/fileview?id=0B_M0mgmVJAKUYzRmZWE1MzgtY2FlOS00ZDcyLWEzMDctYzU1NTJiZjRlMzQ0&hl=en">Ecology Letters, (2010) 13: 96–105</a><br /><br />So this is a bit outside of my usual interests, but I think its important for me to be familiar with lots of different aspects of ecology.  I saw a few talk about Phylogenetic diversity (PD) last year at ESA, but I didn't know much about it so I only really registered that these indices were out there and not much else. In this manuscript, Cadotte et al develop a series of three indices that integrate abundance information and PD indices.  They then test out their indices with an idealized community with three different abundance distributions across the same phylogenetic structure.  Finally they compare their index and a variety of other PD indices with a series of plant communities.<br /><br />Their three indices are phylogenetic abundance eveness (PAE), imbalance of abundances at the clade level (IAC), and abundance weighted evolutionary distance (AED).  PAE and IAC were the easiest to understand I found.  PAE is simply how are branch lengths and abundance related.  If the index is less than one you have high abundances at short branch lengths, and if its greater than 1 you have high abundances at long branches.  If its equal to one the community is perfectly even.  IAC creates a null distribution of abundance splits at each bifurcation in the tree.  So if you have an N of 100 individuals, at the first split you expect it to be 50/ 50 and then at each further on down clade split it would be 25/25.  The idea here is that if a particular clade does well in an environment you would expect that abundances would be skewed towards that clade.  The AED index is a bit more complicated, but it is an entropy style index similar to the Shannon index.  It works similarly to the Shannon index, but instead of just species abundances, it includes phylogenetic information. <br /><br />These indices all fit within an existing PD index framework which they compare their own indices to with a dendrogram.   I'm not really familiar with them at all so I can't really comment.  There are of course some obvious caveats to all of this.  To begin with this all assumes you have well resolved phylogenies for all your taxa, although the authors note you could use simple family level phylogenies.  This makes sense because once you get below that level polytomies can become a problem.  Another problem is that where do you get these phylogenies.  Most phylogenies I've seen are for taxa families, so if you have a community with bears, bees, and flowers, how do these indices work?  I'm sure thats a question thats been looked at in the literature, but I've not read enough about the topic to know.  I found reading this paper to be very informative in terms of helping me learn more about PD, even though it doesn't much relate to my own work.</div>
