---
layout: post
title: "Habitat isolation moderates the strength of top-down control in experimental pond food webs"
date: 2010-03-26
comments: false
---

<div class='post'>
<a href="http://docs.google.com/fileview?id=0B_M0mgmVJAKUOWI3NjE5NDgtNDc0MC00ZTIzLTlhN2EtOWQ3ODA4MWUwYjc1&hl=en">Ecology, 91(3), 2010, pp. 637–643</a><br /><br /><br />Ahhh, what a pleasure it is to read a paper in your field.  I can just cruise through it, I know most of the references already, a nice change from my past few manuscripts where I was going outside of my knowledge base.  This manuscript by Chase et al. in the most recent issue of Ecology was of particular interest to me because my dissertation is based on work in mesocosms.  The authors are examining the relationship between isolation and food web structure on species richness in aquatic mesocosms (1000L tanks).  Basically they have a two factor design; focal ponds are either isolated or connected (three other close ponds) and either have ambient levels of predator taxa, or they are artificially reduced.  They then use MANOVA and ANOVA analysis to see the effect of the treatments on a variety of response variables: herbivore species richness (SR), predator SR, predator biomass, and 3 others.  The take home message is that there's almost always higher richness and more biomass in connected versus isolated habitats.  You might say "So what?".  Well the other thing they have is the reduced predators, so you see less herbivore biomass in the high predation treatments, but a higher species richness.  This is used as evidence of a classic indirect effect.  The other aspect of the paper is they break down herbivores and predators by functional group, and you see highly differentiated responses between connected and isolated habitats.  <br /><br />The authors then posit two mechanisms for the higher diversity of herbivores in the connected / high predation treatment.  Either indirect effects of a keystone predator like dragon fly larva, or intraguild predation causing an overall reduction in the actual predator pressure on herbivores.  They then surmise that its the former because you see a "trophic cascade" in the removal treatments.  Overall, I have to say I love the elegance of the experiment.  Its clear, straight forward, and easily digestible.  But I feel like there could be so much more to how they carried out the analysis.  It reads like a quaint reenactment of Ecology papers of the 90's.  Elegant design, simple statistical analysis, and large effect sizes. At the same time, we know so much more about space and community structure that a major short coming is that it just washes over metacommunity theory with a simple reference to the Holyoak et al 2005 book on the subject.  I'd say I hope they take this further, using experimental mesocosms to explicitly test metacommunity hypotheses...but that's what I want to do :).</div>
