---
layout: post
title: "On the application of multilevel modeling in environmental and ecological studies"
date: 2010-03-09
comments: false
---

<div class='post'>
On the application of multilevel modeling in environmental<br />and ecological studies<br /><a href="http://docs.google.com/fileview?id=0B_M0mgmVJAKUNmQ2ODNjMWItNGE0OC00NjZkLTk0ZDctMTcyNjYyZjQyYTA1&hl=en">Ecology, 91(2), 2010, pp. 355–361</a> (citation is a link to the paper)<br /><br />I just finished reading this paper by Qian et al from the latest issue of Ecology about the use of multilevel modeling.  The paper goes over methods about the uses of multilevel modeling (which can be done with likelihood or Bayesian methods) in ecology with two worked examples.  They make a really great point that hierarchical modeling allows you to include information in your model at different scales into a single model.  The paper did not offer anything new to me, since much of it is drawn from Gelman and Hill's 2007 book: <a href="http://www.stat.columbia.edu/~gelman/arm/">Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical Models</a>.  <br /><br />I'd already read that book as well as Qian's paper on Bayesian ANOVA's and given a talk on that.  If you're unfamiliar with these methods, I think this paper is a good jumping off point, and at least an introduction of the Gelman and Hill book to ecologists. And while they don't do anything earth shattering in the paper, they explicitly state the importance of publishing the method to "normalize" it, and have it be more accepted by ecologists, and I think that I've already had two papers rejected in part because reviewers couldn't understand or see a need for Bayesian methods.  Finally, I think one of their great points is this statement, which I must say I agree with: "In the<br />course of developing the models presented in this paper,<br />we have not used the usual means for judging whether a<br />model is ‘‘significant’’ (the F test or similar tests); rather<br />we qualitatively interpreted all fitted models to see if<br />they make scientific sense. As our improved datagathering<br />technology produces larger amounts of data<br />with increasingly more complicated structure, statistical<br />inference based on hypothesis testing will be increasingly<br />inadvisable. We cannot summarize a complicated<br />relation into a simple dichotomy of null and alternative hypotheses"<br /><br />This is a fast read and I think a worthwhile one for ecologists to familiarize themselves with methods that will no doubt become standard in the years to come.</div>
