---
layout: post
title: "The buzz about the 3M's"
date: 2011-07-28
comments: false
---

<div class='post'>
There has been quite an uproar in the last few days ove a piece by Gene Likens (of Hubbard Brook fame) and David Lindenmayer<a href="http://www.esajournals.org/doi/full/10.1890/0012-9623-92.3.245" target="_blank">on the empirical divide in ecology</a>.  In short the piece says that we live (Ecologist's that is) in a world that incentivizes rapid publication since publication number is the metric that many funding agencies and hiring committees use.   To rise to the top of an ever competitive field, ecologists bump their pub numbers using meta-analysis, modeling and data-mining (hence the 3M's).  They believe this is leading to a decline in natural history and taxonomy and a preference for those kinds of papers.  They cite evidence of this in lower citation rates of empirical research compared to 3M papers.  The future they foresee is one where those 3M papers, which rely on data, eventually are not possible because we've swung so far to the modeling side of things we have no data left to use.  A well thought out response to this is from Caroline Tucker and Marc Cadotte over on the<a href="http://evol-eco.blogspot.com/2011/07/empirical-divide.html",target="_blank"> EEB and Flow</a>.   They observe that many papers in leading journals are still based on primary empirical data collected by the researchers, and that hiring committees often expect candidates to have a field program and they can't get by just on modeling papers and know how (based on MWC's personal experience).  They also point out that bridging the divide between field ecologists and data modelers (not truly theoretical ecologists as a commenter noted) can lead to great papers and of course we need both.  The question they ask is what is the most optimal strategy for an ecologist to take?  And so I think here we come to the "great divide".  <br /><br /> I have to agree with the EEB and Flow post, I don't really see a divide philosophically, I see an unfortunate  system no one is happy with but we are all part of.   My own "optimal strategy" has to become a generalist despite: "Given this double-edged sword, what is the optimal strategy? The glib, easy answer is that ecologists need to become less specialized, to do both theory and empirical work, if they want a successful career"  I work in the field, but I try to have experiments that free me to do modeling work.  I always try and help friends with analysis and modeling problems and its sometimes resulted in joint publications with me as the 3M person.  That said, I've also been on the other end where I'm the primary author working on a modeling paper and asked other friends to be authors because of their in-depth natural history knowledge.  So if I think its good to be both, that being both results in more collaborations, whats the problem?   Young ecologists (myself, and probably anyone without tenure) are fully caught up in the race to get funding, get jobs etc...Older ecologists on the other hand (Likens, etc, or "luminaries" and <a href="http://jabberwocky.weecology.org/" target="_blank">Ethan White</a> calls them) really don't have such worries and it is easy to stand back and criticize (albeit subtly) 3M people.  In fact Ethan, whom is a very bright and personable guy that I met at ESA last year, <a href="http://jabberwocky.weecology.org/2011/07/26/bridging-not-building-divides-in-ecology-things-you-should-read/" target="_blank">seems to have taken the greatest issue </a>with this.   Ethan is spearheading a project, the <a href="http://jabberwocky.weecology.org/2011/07/25/the-ecological-data-wiki/" target"_blank">ecological data wiki</a>, which I think an undertone of the Lindenmayer and Likens paper is to criticize this and say its favoring 3M people and letting the parasitize empricists.  I think this project is great, and I really support open science and here's where I fundamentally disagree with the original article.  As long as a system is set-up to allow coauthorship of papers and we have a culture of collaboration and openess I think an open data system is great.  The system will rapidly break down though the moment someone graciously posts data and then suddenly sees someone else with a paper from it.  I think the ecological data wiki is the future, and I hope it works. <br /><br />On a final note, whats perhaps the most fascinating thing about all of this is how its played out on blogs.  All these great blogs have had a flurry of action responding and unifying the online ecological community.  I would't have even heard of this because I never read the ESA bulletin, but I do read blogs.  I think ecology blogs are truly a new and important way to carry out discourse that opens the doors to many more voices than just select publication by famous scientists in bulletins.  This great community and its response has been whats most impressive to me.</div>
