---
layout: post
title: "A useful paradigm obfuscated."
date: 2011-07-18
comments: false
---

<div class='post'>
I spent most of today working on the first 3 chapters of Andrew Royle and Bob Dorazio's book <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Hierarchical-Modeling-Inference-Ecology-Metapopulations/dp/0123740975">Hierarchical Modeling and Inference in Ecology: The Analysis of Data from Populations, Metapopulations and Communities</a>.  I have a bit of a love/hate relationship with this book.  I guess I should start with the love part.  I like the overall modeling philosophy they present, and I have to say I think they do a good job of it. It comes across philosophically more lucid than other books I've read (Jim Clark's book for example).   Conceptually I like middle ground of a process model and an observational model that is all fit simultaneously.  The problem though is that the book can't decide who its audience is.  I program quite a bit and it provides nice bits of code that are easy to follow.  Part of what I was working on today was transitioning from WinBUGS and R to R and JAGS, an opensource Gibbs sampler with BUGS like syntax.  What really blew me away was the mathematical part of the book.  At times it was very straight forward at others I felt like I needed at least a masters in statistics to understand what they were doing (I don't have that).  Often times as I was reading it, they would make statements like: "The trinomial distribution can be rearranged to yield the following joint likelihood".  As a reader suddenly you're thinking "whoa whoa whoa what just happened there?  I have no idea how they got to that point".   <br /><br />I understand if you're a statistician, perhaps you're used to manipulating likelihoods, but I am not.  So I think what they intended chapter 2 to be, but its way too basic I think and then suddenly ramps up to more complicated Bayesian statistics.  This is the heart of the problem with the book.  At times the book is a simple practical guide to hierarchical modeling for the average ecologist, but out of nowhere jumps to being a technical book for statisticians.  Gelman and Hill in their book <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Analysis-Regression-Multilevel-Hierarchical-Models/dp/052168689X/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1311028398&sr=1-1"> Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical Models</a> present a mathematically sparse but incredibly useful compendium for how to create mulitlevel models in WinBUGS.  Compared to this the Royle and Dorazio book is far more complicated.  I wish they had included more step-by-step math.  How do I build the likelihood functions, how do I manipulate them?  I think another edition with a bit more of that step-by-step math help would be very useful and give the book a broader appeal.</div>
