---
layout: post
title: "Hurray for being a doctor"
date: 2011-06-13
comments: false
---

<div class='post'>
While I feel very foolish that I might be called "Dr. Hart" by anyone, I think its convenient when you want to strengthen a point you're trying to make.  To that end I just got a letter published in our local weekly paper in part I'm guessing by the fact that I signed it "Dr. Edmund Hart".  <a href="http://7dvt.com/2011body-wisdom">Here is the story</a> about a suspicious form of chiropractic treatment called "NRT".  Below is my response to it.  It had to be less than 250 words, so I kept it brief.<br /><br /><br /><br />"I find it hard to believe that you would publish an unquestioningly positive piece about quackery.  The only quote you have regarding the validity of NRT is:  “but just because it’s not scientifically proven doesn’t mean that it doesn’t work.”  Actually that’s precisely what it means.  As a scientist it’s infuriating to see “reporting” on a contentious practice without thinking about the scientific method.  Hypotheses begin with an assumption of a null model, i.e. that the differences between groups are no greater than can be attributed to randomness.  So when a study uses statistical methods to detect an effect of a medical treatment and doesn’t falsify the null hypothesis, it means the method doesn’t work.    Does that mean that people will never see results personally?  No, only that the probability of seeing a result is no more likely compared to receiving a placebo.    A search of the scientific literature finds many papers showing no support for NRT.<br /> <br />Furthermore you seem surprised that she successfully discovers you eat too much sugar and drink tap water.   It’s like a medium in a crowded room saying: “I’m hearing something from the beyond from a John.”  It works because there is a high probability that someone present has a relative named John, it is a common name.  This kind of soft reporting is dangerous because it at best sends people to fraudulent treatments who will lose money, and at worst sends people with real problems to someone who isn’t a real doctor.</div>
<h2>Comments</h2>
<div class='comments'>
<div class='comment'>
<div class='author'>Jessica</div>
<div class='content'>
The Chiropractor emphasized that her treatments were not medical diagnoses...so, I find your suggestion that a chiropractor isn&#39;t a &quot;real&quot; doctor to be somewhat misplaced and unnecessary, not to mention untrue.  A chiropractor is, in fact, a D.C. (Doctor of Chiropractic), different from an M.D. (Medical Doctor), but a Doctor within her field, just as much as you are now within yours.<br /><br />When a study uses statistical methods to detect an effect of a medical treatment and doesn’t falsify the null hypothesis, it may also mean that your experiment was not designed in a way that is able to detect that phenomenon, or that your hypotheses were not appropriate, etc.  It may also mean that your sample size was not large enough, or appropriate, for demonstrating a consistent response, etc.<br /><br />As a fellow Doctor (of course not a &quot;real&quot; doctor, but a PhD like you), I offer a friendly reminder of the flaws and inadequacies of the Scientific Method.  Yes, it may be the best approach we have at this point, but the key perspective of a scientist is of openness to new information, and a willingness to modify our conclusions based on new data.  So, I suggest that a more scientifically truthful response to the article may include a statement like &quot;scientific studies conducted on NRT to date show no consistent positive effect of NRT on physical/physiological/etc. ailments,&quot; with an urge to be cautious when seeking &quot;alternative&quot; treatments for maintaining or improving health.<br /><br />Dr. Jessica Miesel</div>
</div>
</div>
